---
layout: post
id: converters
title: Custom Converters
desc: explicitly defining conversion from one type to another
---

h3. Custom Converters

Although Orika has built-in mapping and converters for many cases by default, it may happen that you have a mapping
use-case which is not supported out of the box. Custom Converters provide one method to resolve this. The simplest way to define your own converter is to extend from <code>ma.glasnost.orika.CustomConverter<A,B></code>, as in the following example:

<pre class="prettyprint">
public class MyConverter extends CustomConverter<Date,MyDate> {
   public MyDate convert(Date source, Type<? extends MyDate> destinationType) {
      // return a new instance of destinationType with all properties filled
   }
}
</pre>

A converter is normally defined to handle a single-directional mapping. If you want to control the mapping between two types in both directions, a bi-directional converter is what you need.

h3. Bi-directional Converters

Bi-directional converters are used to define conversion in both directions between a given set of types. A custom bi-directional converter may be defined by extending from <code>ma.glasnost.orika.converter.BidirectionalConverter<A,B></code>, like so:

<pre class="prettyprint">
public class MyConverter extends BidirectionalConverter<Date,MyDate> {

   public MyDate convertTo(Date source, Type<MyDate> destinationType) {
      // convert in one direction
   }

   public Date convertFrom(Timestamp source, Type<Date> destinationType) {
      // convert in the other direction
   }
}
</pre>

h3. Registering Converters Globally (by converted types)

In order for converters to be recognized and used in mapping operations, they must be registered with a ConverterFactory (which is associated with the MapperFactory). There are two ways to register a converter with the converter factory; one registers the converter at a global level, like so:

<pre class="prettyprint">
ConverterFactory converterFactory = mapperFactory.getConverterFactory();
converterFactory.registerConverter(new MyConverter());
</pre>

Converters registered at a *global level* will be eligible to be used whenever the source and destination types are compatible with the types defined by the converter. 
A more technical description of the process to determine whether a converter will be used is as follows:
# Converters are ordered so that the more specific (in terms of class hierarchy) are tested before the more generic.
# The first in this ordering which answers <code>true</code> to the <code>canConvert(Type<?> sourceType, Type<?> destinationType)</code> method will be used to convert the types

h3. Registering Converters at a Field Level

Converters can also be registered at a *field level*; for cases where you don't necessarily want a converter to act upon every instance of a particular pair of types. To register a converter for use at a field level, the first step is to pass in a converter id (String) with the registration method, like so:

<pre class="prettyprint">
ConverterFactory converterFactory = mapperFactory.getConverterFactory();
converterFactory.registerConverter("myConverterIdValue", new MyConverter());
</pre>

That converter id can then be specifically applied to any field mapping(s), like so:

<pre class="prettyprint">
mapperFactory.classMap( Source.class, Destination.class )
   .fieldMap("sourceField1", "sourceField2").converter("myConverterIdValue").add()
   ...
   .register();
</pre>

h3. Using MapperFacade functions within a Custom Converter

There may be cases within your own custom converters where you want to make use of the MapperFacade to map nested properties of the converted types. A protected variable <code>mapperFacade</code> is available within your custom mapper should you need to make use of it.
