---
layout: post
id: mapper-factory
title: MapperFactory Configuration
desc: settings to customize default mapping behavior
---

h4. Constructing the DefaultMapperFactory

The central focal point of Orika is the MapperFactory, of which DefaultMapperFactory is the provided implementation. DefaultMapperFactory is constructed using a flent-style builder API, like so:

<pre class="prettyprint">
MapperFactory mapperFactory = new DefaultMapperFactory.Builder().build();
</pre>

h4. Configuring the DefaultMapperFactory via it's Builder

There are various methods available on the _Builder_ which can be used to fine-tune the default behavior of Orika, and we will cover some of most interesting ones below:

h5. Customize how Orika resolves Constructors for mapped objects:

Provide your own implementation of _ConstructorResolverStrategy_ to take over this behavior, or just extend the default *ma.glasnost.orika.constructor.SimpleConstructorResolverStrategy*: 

<pre class="prettyprint">
constructorResolverStrategy(ConstructorResolverStrategy constructorResolverStrategy);
</pre>

h5. Customize how Orika compiles its generated source code

Provide your own implementation of _CompilerStrategy_ to take over this behavior, or just extend the default <code>ma.glasnost.orika.impl.generator.JavassistCompilerStrategy</code>.

You can also use an alternative provided with Orika, <code>ma.glasnost.orika.impl.generator.EclipseJdtCompilerStrategy</code> which is helpful for step-debugging generated mapper code; more information about this alternative is described in the troubleshooting and debugging page.

<pre class="prettyprint">
compilerStrategy(CompilerStrategy compilerStrategy);
</pre>

h5. Customize how Orika resolved properties 

Provide your own implementation of PropertyResolverStrategy to take over this behavior, or just extend the default <code>ma.glasnost.orika.property.IntrospectorPropertyResolver</code>.

<pre class="prettyprint">
propertyResolverStrategy(PropertyResolverStrategy propertyResolverStrategy);
</pre>

h5. Customize how Orika builds ClassMaps

Provide your own implementation of ClassMapBuilderFactory to take over this behavior, or just extend the default <code>ma.glasnost.orika.metadata.ClassMapBuilder.Factory</code>.

You can also use an alternative provided with Orika, <code>ma.glasnost.orika.metadata.ScoringClassMapBuilder.Factory</code> which uses a word-scoring algorithm to determine a best-fit matching of the fields for a pair of types; it even attempts to auto-resolve matches down to the nested properties and multi-occurrence elements.
	
<pre class="prettyprint">
classMapBuilderFactory(ClassMapBuilderFactory classMapBuilderFactory);
</pre>

h5. Customize whether Orika will use auto-mapping

You can configure whether or not Orika will perform auto-mapping at runtime for types that were not registered; this behavior is _enabled_ by default, but it can be disabled for cases where you want to be absolutely explicit about all classes that are mapped.

<pre class="prettyprint">
useAutoMapping(boolean useAutoMapping);
</pre>


h5. Customize whether Orika will map null values from source to destination

You can configure whether or not Orika will map null values from the source to destination. This behavior is _enabled_ by default, but it can be disabled for cases where you want to leave the destination properties untouched if the source property contains a null value.

<pre class="prettyprint">
mapNulls(boolean mapNulls);
</pre>